# Snakemake workflow for ONT WGS and Adaptive Sampling Alignment: Explicit Conda Branch

This branch uses the .yaml files in the /env folder to create new conda environments each time this repository is cloned. Only use this if running the workflow not on McClintock or Franklin.

This workflow uses unaligned called bam files of ONT data to produce aligned bam files, SNV calls, SV calls, CNV calls, VEP annotations, and QC statistics. All input bams should be checked for quality control prior to using this workflow.

*Special note: You must run `vep_install` within the active `vep-111.0` conda environment to complete installation. Make sure to install all of the plugins in `annotation.smk` or edit `run_vep_111` to exclude them. Update the config file with your cache and plugins directory location.*

*Longphase: Longphase must be installed on your path or within the path of the `alignmentCalling` environment. There is currently no conda available for this tool.*


## Usage
```
snakemake -p --use-conda --cores 30
```

### Setup

1. Clone this repository to your **final destination for files**. Snakemake works best with relative paths.
2. Edit `Snakefile` to include the appropriate rules. Most likely this is already set up correctly. `get_targets` generates alignment files for all samples in the file `config/targets.txt`.
    - The workflow searches for bam files with a matching prefix (M[0-9]{5}) in the directory (`input_dir`) specified in the config file.
    - Optionally change `explicitLibraries` to `true` to specify a list of bam files in the `config/targets.txt` instead
3. Create a sample database file, like  `config/NSC0000_example_config.tsv` with your sample information. All fields are required. 
4. Edit `config/targets.txt` to include only the samples you wish to generate alignments for.
5. Edit `config.yaml`
    - if running on a new server, update paths for all reference data, tools, and input/output directories.
6. Run!

### Useful flags and recommendations

If work is interrupted or resumed after failure, use `--rerun-triggers mtime` to not re-generate already completed files and/or `--rerun-incomplete` to remove incomplete/corrupted files.

If mamba is not installed, use `--conda-frontend conda`.

For best performance, devote set `threads` to 30 in the config file and run with at least 1 additional core per group of 30 threads, e.g. if `threads: 30`, then run `snakemake --cores 62`. This allows non-processor intensive (but time intensive!) tasks to run in the background of tasks that are both processor and time intensive.

## Outputs

- Indexed bam file of full alignmentIndexed bam file of KIF1A only, plus sex check controls FMR1 and COL1A1
- SNV vcf generated with clair3, phased and not phased
- SV vcfs, phased and not phased
    - generated by sniffles
    - generated by SVIM
    - generated by cuteSV
- CNV vcf and plots, generated by QDNAseq
- VEP vcf of SNV annotations
    - csv containing variants with population allele frequencies < 0.01
- quality control statistics
    - cramino stats for full alignment includes data yield, N50, etc.
        - cramino stats for target region includes more accurate estimate of read lengths for target region only
    - phasing stats, generated with whatshap
    - hp_dp stats, the average read depth per haplotag in targeted regions.

## Requirements

Snakemake 7.32.4 (compatible with Snakemake versions > 8)

Python >= 3.10
